UI Patterns / Overlays interface guidelines (#167)
primer/design: content/components/overlay.mdx

</Box>

<LabelGroup display="block" mb={4}>
    <Label as="a" href="https://primer.style/components/ActionList" variant="xl" color="text.success" outline style="text-decoration: none; line-height: 20px;">
        <img width="20" height="20" alt=" " src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/123878374-ce9d4d00-d8f3-11eb-8adf-1a160292ff53.png" style="vertical-align: middle; margin-right: 4px;" />
        React
    </Label>
    <Label as="a" href="https://www.figma.com/file/GCvY3Qv8czRgZgvl1dG6lp/Primer-Web?node-id=1927%3A0" variant="xl" outline style="text-decoration: none; line-height: 20px;">
        <img width="20" height="20" alt=" " src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/123878720-80d51480-d8f4-11eb-9b10-d02a1cb606f8.png" style="vertical-align: middle; margin-right: 4px;" />
        Figma
    </Label>
</LabelGroup>

<!--
<Label as="a" href="/components/ActionList" variant="xl" outline style="text-decoration: none">ViewComponent</Label>

-->

<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/125706076-b16bb3d4-800f-4310-a082-f576e215e6c8.png" alt="Overlay examples" />

## Overview

> Overlays can streamline the interface by allowing extra options to be displayed as the person needs them. Overlays present a new context to the user, and can facilitate the completion of individual tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overlays can streamline the interface by allowing extra options to be displayed as needed. Overlays present a new context to the user, and can facilitate the completion of individual tasks.
```

> **Keep overlays simple**. Overlays are meant to be interacted quickly, so they're better suited for focused experiences. Avoid creating a whole page inside an overlay. Prefer single-column layouts that convey a clear goal the moment it's opened.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Keep overlays simple**. Overlays are meant to be interacted with quickly, so they're better suited for focused experiences. Avoid creating a whole page inside an overlay. Prefer single-column layouts that convey a clear goal the moment it's opened.
```

> **Overlays are often used for data manipulation**. Overlays can appear on top of the screen to let the user select and edit content in a way that was previously not available. Ensure its interactions are quick and effective.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Overlays are often used for data manipulation**. Overlays can appear on top of the screen to let the user select and edit content in a way that was previously not available. Ensure these interactions are quick and effective.
```

**Overlays can be fully interacted with a keyboard**. Keyboard navigation should be limited to the elements of the active overlay. If the overlay contains a list, let users navigate using keyboard arrows. Pressing Escape should dismiss the overlay. When an overlay is dismissed, focus generally returns to the element that opened it.

**Overlay contents should work well on any device**. Overlays may transform into bottom sheets or full-screen experiences on mobile devices. Make sure the experience takes into account devices of all sizes and input methods.

## Anatomy

> An overlay may wrap its content directly, or include a header to provide content, and a footer to provide actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An overlay may include a header to provide content, and a footer to provide actions.
```
I removed the first part of the sentence because it was making it hard to parse. If that content is important, I recommend writing it in a simpler way.

<ImageContainer>
  <img
    width="636"
    src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/125708874-bdb83c2b-e215-450f-b888-542b16c23dad.png"
    alt="Overlay anatomy"
    style="background: none"
  />
</ImageContainer>

### Overlay header

An overlay header appears at the top of an overlay. It may introduce its content with title, description, and general actions.

Avoid using a description if the title already conveys the same information. Don't be verbose.

> Reserve confirmation actions such as "Save", "Apply", and "Done" to the overlay footer, not the header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reserve confirmation actions such as **Save**, **Apply**, and **Done** to the overlay footer, not the header.
```

    alt=" "
    style="background: none"
  />
</ImageContainer>
<Caption>Overlay header with larger title and description.</Caption>

### Overlay footer

Use an overlay footer to show confirmation actions, navigation links or other important elements that should appear at the bottom. Footers are shown outside of the scrolling area, and are always visible to the user.

A divider between the footer and content area is optional if there's no overflow scrolling.

<Grid gridTemplateColumns={['1fr', null, null, null, '1fr 1fr']} gridGap={5}>
    <Box>
        <img
            width="464"
            alt="Overlay footer"
            src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/125710928-020030c9-ac72-486a-905d-521d6b879517.png"
        />
        <Caption>Use buttons in a footer to let the user finish the task.</Caption>
    </Box>
    <Box>
        <img
            width="464"
            alt="Overlay footer"
            src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/125710210-feb2e37e-aa45-4f67-984f-09d50fde0c26.png"
        />
        <Caption>Use a link in a footer to provide access to a related page.</Caption>
    </Box>
</Grid>

## Behaviors

### Closing

> Users may always click outside or press Escape to close an overlay. Some overlays may provide a close button as an easy escape route. They're useful in larger overlays, and when the overlay is no longer visually connected to the source that triggered them. Always use close buttons in dialogs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users may always click outside or press Escape to close an overlay. Some overlays may provide a close button as an easy escape route. Close buttons are useful in larger overlays, and when the overlay is no longer visually connected to the source that triggered it. Always use close buttons in dialogs.
```

> Closing an overlay may apply changes right away (as seen in selection panels). If the overlay contains changes that are not immediately applied (such as in a form), offer footer buttons such as "Save", "Apply", or "Done". If the user closes the overlay without saving, offer a [`beforeUnload`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WindowEventHandlers/onbeforeunload) prompt to the browser so the user can avoid loosing changes. The same confirmation should appear in the case they try to close the browser tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Closing an overlay may apply changes right away (as seen in selection panels). If the overlay contains changes that are not immediately applied (such as in a form), offer footer buttons such as **Save**, **Apply**, or **Done**. If the user closes the overlay without saving, offer a [`beforeUnload`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WindowEventHandlers/onbeforeunload) prompt to the browser so the user can avoid losing changes. The same confirmation should appear if the user tries to close the browser tab.
```

Users may always click outside or press Escape to close an overlay. Some overlays may provide a close button as an easy escape route. Close buttons are useful in larger overlays, and when the overlay is no longer visually connected to the source that triggered it. Always use close buttons in dialogs.

Closing an overlay may apply changes right away. If the overlay contains changes that are not immediately applied (such as in a form), offer footer buttons such as **Save**, **Apply**, or **Done**. To avoid people from loosing important unsaved changes, a [`confirmation`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WindowEventHandlers/onbeforeunload) may be used.

The user should also be able to press the browser’s back button to close the overlay. This is particularly useful on mobile devices.

### Width and height

Width | Size
----|----
`sm` | 256px
`md` | 320px
`lg` | 480px
`xl` | 640px
`xxl` | 960px

Height | Size
----|----
`auto` | Adjusts to content height
`xs` | 192px
`sm` | 256px
`md` | 320px
`lg` | 432px
`xl` | 600px

## Placement

Overlays may be:

- Anchored next a source element (popovers).
- Centered on a container or on the viewport with a backdrop (dialogs).

> On smaller screens, overlays can be one of the options above, or adapt to mobile-specific variations. There, they may:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On smaller screens, overlays can be one of the options above, or adapt to mobile-specific variations. In this case, they may:
```

Anchored overlays are useful for menus, quick interactions, and data manipulation. They don't dim the rest of the screen when presented. 

Interaction with the rest of the screen is temporarily blocked while an anchored overlay is active. They can be dismissed at any time by clicking outside of it. An anchored overlay may also be dismissed after choosing one of its options or buttons, or when clicking on an optional Close button.

<ImageContainer>
    <img
        alt=" "
        width="372"
        src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/126412744-45197568-26cd-432f-bfc0-03f5c90cb647.png"
        style="background: none"
    />
</ImageContainer>
<Caption>An anchored overlay attached to its source.</Caption>

Keep anchored overlays out of the viewport edges. They should be at least 16px away from the viewport boundaries. Users shouldn't be blocked from scrolling the page while an anchored overlay is open, nor should a scrolling event in the page close the overlay.

For more complex overlays, consider enabling mobile-specific bottom sheet or full-screen variations.

> Primer React uses [`anchoredPosition`](https://primer.style/components/anchoredPosition) to calculate the position of an anchored or centered overlay:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Primer React uses [`anchoredPosition`](https://primer.style/react/anchoredPosition) to calculate the position of an anchored or centered overlay.
```

---
title: Overlay
status: Alpha
---

import {Grid, Flex, Box, Button, ButtonOutline, Heading, Label, LabelGroup, Link} from '@primer/components'

<Box sx={{fontSize: 3}} class="lead" as="p">
    An overlay is a flexible floating surface, used to display transient content such as menus, selection options, dialogs, and more. Overlays use shadows to express elevation, and may include a backdrop that dims the rest of the screen for focus. 
</Box>

<LabelGroup display="block" mb={4}>
    <Label as="a" href="https://primer.style/react/Overlay" variant="xl" color="text.success" outline style="text-decoration: none; line-height: 20px;">
        <img width="20" height="20" alt=" " src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/123878374-ce9d4d00-d8f3-11eb-8adf-1a160292ff53.png" style="vertical-align: middle; margin-right: 4px;" />
        React
    </Label>

>     <Label as="a" href="https://www.figma.com/file/GCvY3Qv8czRgZgvl1dG6lp/Primer-Web?node-id=1927%3A0" variant="xl" outline style="text-decoration: none; line-height: 20px;">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <Label as="a" href="https://www.figma.com/file/GCvY3Qv8czRgZgvl1dG6lp/Primer-Web?node-id=9677%3A44413" variant="xl" outline style="text-decoration: none; line-height: 20px;">
```

## Overview

Overlays can streamline the interface by allowing extra options to be displayed as needed. Overlays present a new context to the user, and can facilitate the completion of individual tasks. They are also useful for data-manipulation, providing a dedicated surface for selecting or editing options.

**Keep overlays simple**. Overlays are meant to be interacted with quickly, so they're better suited for clear experiences. Avoid creating a whole page inside an overlay. Prefer single-column layouts that convey a clear goal the moment it's opened.

**Overlays can be fully interacted with a keyboard**. Keyboard navigation should be limited to the elements of the active overlay. If the overlay contains a list, let users navigate using keyboard arrows. Pressing Escape should dismiss the overlay. When an overlay is dismissed, focus generally returns to the element that opened it.

**Overlay contents should work well on any device**. Overlays may adapt to bottom sheets or full-screen on mobile devices. Make sure the overlay contents work with all supported sizes and input methods.

## Anatomy

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<ImageContainer>
  <img
    width="636"
    src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/125708874-bdb83c2b-e215-450f-b888-542b16c23dad.png"
    alt="Overlay anatomy"
    style="background: none"
  />
</ImageContainer>
```

> <ImageContainer>

Reviewer: The text that follows this image is too close to it, maybe it's because it's missing an image caption?

Author: It looks so. I've tried adding a `mb={4}` prop to it with little luck. For now I've added a simple caption, but it's a little redundant with the paragraphs below.

> Overlays may include a header to provide context, and footer to host actions. The content area supports vertical scrolling when showing lots of items and longer forms. For rendering interactive lists, use [Action lists](/components/action-list).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overlays may include a header to provide context, and footer to host actions. The content area supports vertical scrolling when showing lots of items and longer forms. For rendering interactive lists, use an [action list](/components/action-list).
```

Author: The copy here has been cleaned up and no longer mentions action lists.

Overlays have a **safe area** of 16px. This is not a strict padding, but a guide to keep the overlay boundaries free of text and heavy visual elements. Interactive elements may still be 8px away from the edge, as long as their main visual elements are within the safe area. For example, the **Close** button has its padding outside the safe area, but its octicon is distant enough.

> <ImageContainer>
>   <img
>     width="636"
>     src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/125708874-bdb83c2b-e215-450f-b888-542b16c23dad.png"
>     alt="Overlay anatomy"
>     style="background: none"
>   />
> </ImageContainer>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Avoid using a description if the title already conveys the same information. Don't be verbose.

Reserve confirmation actions such as **Save**, **Apply**, and **Done** to the overlay footer, not the header.

A divider between the header and content area is optional if there's no overflow scrolling.

<ImageContainer>
  <img
    width="600"
    src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/125709255-7d0f199d-9ea9-46ac-ae5a-c6e60d97b289.png"
    alt=" "
    style="background: none"
  />
</ImageContainer>
<Caption>Overlay header with search field.</Caption>

<ImageContainer>
  <img
    width="600"
    src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/125709258-c542e916-69c3-4b37-9f7d-c118d9e704bd.png"
    alt=" "
    style="background: none"
  />
</ImageContainer>
<Caption>Overlay header with larger title and description.</Caption>

### Overlay footer

Use an overlay footer to show confirmation actions, navigation links or other important elements that should appear at the bottom. Footers are shown outside of the scrolling area, and are always visible to the user.

A divider between the footer and content area is optional if there's no overflow scrolling.

> <Grid gridTemplateColumns={['1fr', null, null, null, '1fr 1fr']} gridGap={5}>

Author: I think those are just different components? I with we can only achieve the multi-column with `Grid`...

> <Grid gridTemplateColumns={['1fr', null, null, null, '1fr 1fr']} gridGap={5}>

Reviewer 3: I think we can do it with `Box`. See https://primer.style/react/Grid#deprecation

    <Box>
        <img
            width="464"
            alt="Overlay footer"
            src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/125710928-020030c9-ac72-486a-905d-521d6b879517.png"
        />
        <Caption>Use buttons in a footer to let the user finish the task.</Caption>
    </Box>
    <Box>
        <img
            width="464"
            alt="Overlay footer"
            src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/125710210-feb2e37e-aa45-4f67-984f-09d50fde0c26.png"
        />
        <Caption>Use a link in a footer to provide access to a related page.</Caption>
    </Box>
</Grid>

## Behaviors

### Opening

Overlays appear in the page after a direct user interaction, i.e. on click, tap, press, etc.

> On desktops and other devices with a fine pointer, overlays may also be triggered by a delayed `hover` event (GitHub calls these _hovercards_). Since this behavior doesn't work on touch devices, consider whether tapping on the source element should open the overlay or take the user to its destination directly. For example, a delayed hover on a **@username** may present a _hovercard_ on desktop, while a tap on the username would open a bottom sheet with a link to the user's profile page.

Author: Hovercards are not mentioned anywhere in primery.style 😳. We should definitely have guidance on it at some point.

Don't show overlays on page load. For that, prefer in-page messages and flash banners.

### Closing

Users may always click outside or press Escape to close an overlay. Some overlays may provide a close button as an easy escape route. Close buttons are useful in larger overlays, and when the overlay is no longer visually connected to the source that triggered it. Always use close buttons in dialogs.

Closing an overlay may apply changes right away (as seen in selection panels). If the overlay contains changes that are not immediately applied (such as in a form), offer footer buttons such as **Save**, **Apply**, or **Done**. If the user closes the overlay without saving, offer a [`beforeUnload`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WindowEventHandlers/onbeforeunload) prompt to the browser so the user can avoid losing changes. The same confirmation should appear if the user tries to close the browser tab.

The user should also be able to press the browser's back button to close the overlay. This is particularly useful on mobile devices.

> ### Width and height

Author: Eventually, I think that's a good goal. I tested something around that in the past while looking at https://github.com/github/primer/issues/41. Let's sync on this later!

> ### Width and height

Reviewer: Please add a sentence here that introduces what the following tables are about.

Make sure larger dialogs remain mobile-friendly. Even large dialogs need to be responsive. A dialog's width and height will be readjusted depending on the screen size and should never exceed the available space. Use responsive solutions to adjust the UI so they behave well on smaller screens.

Dialogs never hit the viewport edges. Use a safe 32px margin to keep dialogs visually distinct from the rest of the page.

Simple and small dialogs can remain as-is on mobile. As more elements are added to it, mobile-specific style variations such as Bottom sheet and Full-screen should be considered.

<ImageContainer>
  <img
    width="838"
    src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/126410311-da5b64f2-049b-4eca-a5d8-2281b49f9d43.png"
    alt=" "
    style="background: none"
  />
</ImageContainer>
<Caption>

A visualization of `inside-center` positioning, with underneath source elements and their available `align` (`start`, `center`, `end`) settings. 

</Caption>

### Bottom sheets (specific to small screens)

> A bottom sheet is a mobile-friendly and mobile-specific placement option. Overlays that appear anchored or centered in large screens may adapt to appear as a bottom sheet on small screens.

Reviewer 3: If we don't ever want a bottom sheet to be used on a large viewport, we should explicitly say that.

A bottom sheet variant can be used when the overlay content is too overwhelming to appear anchored, or to faciliate reachability. A bottom sheet dims the rest of the screen for focus. This provides additional emphasis on its content and actions. Tapping on the backdrop dismisses the overlay.

A bottom sheet has rounded upper corners. Its height should always accommodate the content inside.

<img
    src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/126387985-8c14aaf9-6b63-4ead-b466-520f3156cb1a.png"
    alt=" "
    style="background: none"
/>

In order to work well in non-rectangular mobile screens and browser UI, bottom sheets may add extra padding inside the overlay, following [`env(safe-area-inset-*)`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/env()) environment variables.

> On portrait, a bottom sheet takes up the full-width.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On portrait, a bottom sheet takes up the full width of the viewport.
```

On landscape, a bottom sheet has a maximum width of 480px, centered horizontally.

<ImageContainer>
    <img
        width="880"
        src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/126532776-fb9efd1c-1c98-4345-817e-46a269863850.png"
        alt=" "
        style="background: none"
    />
</ImageContainer>
<Caption>Bottom sheet on landscape viewports.</Caption>

<img
    src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/293280/126388872-93a85fa6-f0be-428d-bbd9-58bd602cff76.png"
    alt=" "
    style="background: none"
/>
<Caption>Indicator when no title and close button are present.</Caption>

A bottom sheet without a title or close button gets an indicator at the top. In case the bottom sheet gets long and takes all the available height, the indicator will reserve a safe area to keep the overlay dismissable.

> <!--

Reviewer 3: Should we just remove this commented section?
